
The Arts and Crafts movement was an aesthetic design
movement occurring in the last years of the 19th 
century and the early years of the 20th century. 
The movement began in Britain and quicky became an
American style. The Arts and Crafts movement was 
inspired by the writings of John Ruskin.

Arts and Crafts was a design movement initiated by
William Morris in 1861 which aimed to improve the 
quality of design and make it available to the 
widest possible audience
https://www.tate.org.uk/art/art-terms/a/arts-and-crafts

The Arts and Crafts movement emerged from the 
attempt to reform design and decoration in mid-19th
century Britain. It was a reaction against a 
perceived decline in standards that the reformers
associated with machinery and factory production. 
Their critique was sharpened by the items that they
saw in the Great Exhibition of 1851, which they
considered to be excessively ornate, artificial,
and ignorant of the qualities of the materials used
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arts_and_Crafts_movement

The Arts and Crafts Movement originated in Britain 
during the late 19th century and was characterized 
by a style of decoration reminiscent of medieval 
times. The primary artist associated with the 
movement is William Morris, whosework was 
reinforced with writings from John Ruskin
http://www.designishistory.com/1850/arts--crafts/

WILLIAM MORRIS (1834-1896)
William Morris is best known for his pattern designs
which look to nature for their inspiration. He was a
leading member of the Arts andCrafts Movement.
https://www.artyfactory.com/graphic_design/graphic_designers/william_morris.html

*PICTURE*
https://artsandcraftshomes.com/.image/c_limit%2Ccs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_444/MTQ0NDY2MzAxMTE2MjI5NTMx/morrisco.webp
https://artsandcraftshomes.com/.image/c_limit%2Ccs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_380/MTYyMTM4MjYxODgyNDE0Mzgy/pale-painted-kitchen.webp
https://cdn.mos.cms.futurecdn.net/9q5xwhNr3FWLKHFubEc5hf-768-80.jpg.webp
https://cdn.mos.cms.futurecdn.net/4yEPZ4BueqzZ9eMvmnrssQ-768-80.jpg.webp
https://cdn.mos.cms.futurecdn.net/dkvxRK7Akx2Q44NXvmLGAd-768-80.jpg.webp

Arts and Crafts Movement
Enrance Hall at Whightwick Manor with Morris designed
fabric William Morris believed people should be 
surrounded by beautiful, well-made things. This 
vision inspired the emergence of the Arts and Crafts
movement in the 1860s. Morris's lectures and essays
on art and his rediscovery of traditional craft
techniques helped spread the movement, as did the
decorative designs and products from his company:
Morris, Marshall, Faulkner & Co.

As a diverse international movement, Arts and Crafts
encompassed many characteristics. There was no 
single manifesto and no one style to which it 
adhered. Several Arts& Crafts guilds, organizations,
and schools helped fuel the movement.

The core characteristics of the Arts and Crafts 
movement are a belief in craftsmanship which 
stresses the inherent beauty of the material,
the importance of nature as inspiration, and the
value of simplicity, utility,and beauty. The 
movement often promoted reform as part of its
philosophy and advanced the idea of the designer
as craftsman.
https://exhibitions.lib.umd.edu/williammorris/morris-influence/arts-and-crafts-movement






Elegant swirls of vines, flowers, and leaves in 
perfect symmetry, William Morris’ iconic patterns 
are instantly recognizable. Designed during the 
1800s, Morris’ woodblock-printed wallpaper designs
were revolutionary for their time, and can still 
be found all over the world, printed for furniture
upholstery, curtains, ceramics, and even fashion
accessories. But do you know the history of how
they came to be?

The Arts and Crafts Movement

Beginning in Britain around 1880, the Arts and 
Crafts movement was born from the values of people
concerned about the effects of industrialization
on design and traditional craft. In response,
architects, designers, craftsmen, and artists
turned to new ways of living and working, 
pioneering new approaches to create decorative
arts.

One of the most influential figures during this
time was William Morris, who actively promoted
the joy of craftsmanship and the beauty of the
nature. Having produced over 50 wallpaper 
designs throughout his career, Morris became 
an internationally renowned designer and 
manufacturer. Other creatives such as 
architects, painters, sculptors and designers
began to take up his ideas. They began a unified
art and craft approach to design, which soon 
spread across Europe and America, and eventually
Japan, emerging as its own folk crafts movement
called Mingei.

Who was William Morris?
Born in Walthamstow, East London in March 1834,
William Morris was a poet, artist, philosopher,
typographer, political theorist, and arguably 
the most celebrated designer of the Arts & 
Crafts movement. He strived to protect and 
revive the traditional techniques of handmade
production that were being replaced by machines
during the Victorian era's Industrial 
Revolution. Although he dabbled in embroidery,
carpet-making, poetry and literature, he
mastered the art of woodblock printing, and 
created some of the most recognizable textile
patterns of the 19th century.


The Arts and Crafts Movement and William Morris
Portrait of William Morris by Frederick
Hollyer via Wikimedia Commons


 

Born into a wealthy middle-class family, Morris
enjoyed a privileged childhood, as well as a 
sizable inheritance, meaning he would never
struggle to earn his own income. He spent his
childhood drawing, reading, and exploring 
forests and grand buildings, which triggered
his fascination with natural landscapes and 
architecture.

Having developed his own particular taste from
a young age, he began to realize the only way
he could have the beautiful home he wanted
was if he designed every part of it himself.
As he famously once said, “Have nothing in 
your houses that you do not know to be
useful or believe to be beautiful.”

 

The Red House
While studying at Oxford, Morris met his
lifelong friend, architect Philip Webb. 
His dear friend helped him design and 
construct his Medieval-inspired, Neo-Gothic
style family home in Bexleyheath, where he
lived with his wife, Jane Morris, and his
two children, Jane “Jenny” Alice Morris
and Mary “May” Morris. Built in 1860, 
it became known as the Red House, and
is now one of the most significant
buildings of the Arts and Crafts era.
Today, the house is owned by the 
National Trust and is open to visitors.


The Arts and Crafts Movement and William Morris
The “Red House,” home of William Morris.
via Wikimedia Commons
A number of Morris’ creative friends spent
a lot of time at the Red House, including
Pre-Raphaelite painters Edward Burne-Jones
and Dante Gabriel Rossetti, who both 
helped him elaborately decorate the 
abode. While he envisioned living there 
for the rest of his life, Morris’ 
perfectionism caused him to move on after
only five years. Over the course of his 
short stay, he discovered a number problems
with the property. However, he enjoyed the
process so much that he decided to set up 
his own design company, with a desire to create
affordable “art for all.”


Morris, Marshall, Faulkner & Co. which was 
later known as simply Morris & Co., was 
incredibly successful, and produced reams of
fabric and wallpaper designs for over 150 years.

The Arts and Crafts Movement and William Morris
The Red House front door from inside. 
Photo: Tony Hisgett (CC BY 2.0) via 
Wikimedia Commons

 

Morris’ Wallpaper Designs
Featuring swirling leaves, thieving birds,
rose-filled trellises, and fruit tree 
branches, the designs of William Morris have
a unique timeless quality. He began 
designing wallpapers in 1862, but their
sale was delayed by several years while
he experimented with printing from zinc
plates.

The Arts and Crafts Movement and William
Morris

Morris & Co. sample book via Wikimedia
Commons

Inspired by nature, Morris’ designs
feature leaves, vines, and flowers that he 
observed in his gardens or on walks in the
countryside. Rather than life-like
illustrations, his drawings are subtly 
stylized versions. Daisy, a simple design
featuring meadow flowers, was the first 
of Morris’ wallpaper designs to go on 
sale in 1864.

The Arts and Crafts Movement and William
Morris
“Diasy” 1864 via Wikimedia Commons

Morris designed Trellis after being unable
to find a wallpaper that he liked enough
for his own home. Inspired by the rose
trellis in the garden of the Red House,
Morris designed the pattern which went on
sale in 1864. Interestingly, Morris could
not draw birds, and the birds for this 
design were actually sketched by Philip 
Webb, the same friend and architect who
designed the Red House.

The Arts and Crafts Movement and William 
Morris
William Morris design for “Trellis” 
wallpaper 1862 via Wikimedia Commons

The Arts and Crafts Movement and William 
Morris
“Trellis” wallpaper designed by William 
Morris 1862 and first produced in 1864.
Via Wikimedia Commons

Morris had his wallpapers printed by hand,
using carved, pear woodblocks loaded with 
natural, mineral-based dyes, and pressed
down with the aid of a foot-operated weight.
Each design was made by carefully lining 
up and printing the woodblock motifs again 
and again to create a seamless repeat.
Morris once spoke about the precise
process, saying, “Remember that a pattern 
is either right or wrong. It cannot be
forgiven for blundering, as a picture may 
be which has otherwise great qualities in it.
It is with a pattern as with a fortress,
it is no stronger than its weakest point.”

He employed the printers Jeffrey & Co. to
print his wallpapers up until his death 
in 1896, when the Merton factory took over
production until the company’s voluntary
liquidation in 1940.
https://mymodernmet.com/arts-and-crafts-movement-william-morris/


The Morris & Co. design archives were 
later purchased by home furnishings
manufacturer, Arthur Sanderson & Sons.
Both company’s archives sit under the Style
Library umbrella, part of the British 
furnishings company, Walker Greenbank.


Today, Morris & Co.’s traditional
block-printed wallpaper is still available
on request and costs upwards of $327 a roll.
In contrast, the now machine-produced 
archive collections come in at a much lower
price of around $50. Although affordable,
it seems Morris’s life-long dream of
handcrafted design for all is sadly yet
to be fully achieved.

The Arts and Crafts Movement and William Morris
“Fruit (or Pomegranate)” wallpaper
designed by William Morris. Via Wikimedia Commons


The Arts and Crafts Movement and William Morris
“Pink and Rose” 1890 via Wikimedia Commons


The Arts and Crafts Movement and William Morris
“Tulip and Willow” 1873 via Wikimedia Commons


The Arts and Crafts Movement and William Morris
“Tulip and Willow” printed on linen. Via

Wikimedia Commons


Related Articles:
The Unique History and Exquisite Aesthetic
of Japan’s Ethereal Woodblock Prints

Interview: Bold Murals Pay Tribute to
Mexican Arts and Crafts

Art History: Ancient Practice of Textile
Art and How It Continues to Reinvent Itself

4 Super Fun and Creative Wallpaper Designs

Vibrant Photos of Beautifully Diverse Floor Patterns From Around the World
https://mymodernmet.com/arts-and-crafts-movement-william-morris/2/

HEILBRUNN TIMELINE OF ART HISTORY  ESSAYS
The Arts and Crafts Movement in America




















Monica Obniski

Independent Scholar

June 2008

The Arts and Crafts movement emerged during
the late Victorian period in England, the 
most industrialized country in the world at
that time. Anxieties about industrial life
fueled a positive revaluation of 
handcraftsmanship and precapitalist forms
of culture and society. Arts and Crafts 
designers sought to improve standards of
decorative design, believed to have been 
debased by mechanization, and to create 
environments in which beautiful and fine
workmanship governed. The Arts and Crafts
movement did not promote a particular
style, but it did advocate reform as part 
of its philosophy and instigated a critique
of industrial labor; as modern machines 
replaced workers, Arts and Crafts proponents
called for an end to the division of labor
and advanced the designer as craftsman.

The British movement derived its
philosophical underpinnings from two 
important sources: first, the designer
A. W. N. Pugin (1812–1852), whose early 
writings promoting the Gothic Revival 
presaged English apprehension about 
industrialization, and second, theorist
and art critic John Ruskin (1819–1900),
who advocated medieval architecture as
a model for honest craftsmanship and 
quality materials. Ruskin’s persuasive
rhetoric influenced the movement’s
figurehead (and ardent socialist) William Morris
(1834–1896), who believed that 
industrialization alienated labor and 
created a dehumanizing distance between
the designer and manufacturer. Morris 
strove to unite all the arts within the
decoration of the home, emphasizing nature
and simplicity of form.

The American Arts and Crafts movement
was inextricably linked to the British
movement and closely aligned with the 
work of William Morris and the second 
generation of architect-designers, 
including Charles Robert Ashbee 
(1863–1942), who toured the United
States, and Charles Francis Annesley
Voysey (1857–1941), whose work was known
through important publications such as
The Studio. British ideals were 
disseminated in America through journal 
and newspaper writing, as well as through
societies that sponsored lectures and
programs. The U.S. movement was
multicentered, with societies forming 
nationwide. Boston, historically linked
to English culture, was the first city
to feature a Society of Arts and Crafts,
founded in June 1897. Chicago’s Arts 
and Crafts Society began at Hull House,
one of the first American settlement
houses for social reform, in October
1897. Numerous societies followed in 
cities such as Minneapolis and New York,
as well as rural towns, including
Deerfield, Massachusetts.

Unlike in England, the undercurrent of
socialism of the Arts and Crafts movement
in the United States did not spread much
beyond the formation of a few Utopian
communities. Rose Valley was one of these
artistic and social experiments. William

Lightfoot Price (1861–1916), a Philadelphia
architect, founded Rose Valley in 1901 near
Moylan, Pennsylvania. The Rose Valley
shops, like other Arts and Crafts 
communities, were committed to producing
artistic handicraft, which included
furnishings (1991.145), pottery, metalwork,
and bookbinding. The Byrdcliffe Arts 
and Crafts Colony was another Utopian 
Arts and Crafts community. Outside of
Woodstock, New York, Englishman Ralph
Radcliffe Whitehead (1854–1929) and his
wife Jane Byrd McCall Whitehead
(1861–1955) founded Byrdcliffe, which was
completed and operating by 1903. There
craftspeople worked in various media, 
including woodwork, pottery, textiles,
and metalwork. In harmony with the 
principles of the Arts and Crafts movement,
Byrdcliffe furniture (1991.311.1) is a
study in rectilinearity, simply treated 
materials, and minimal decoration.

In urban centers, socialist experiments 
were undertaken on a community level, 
frequently in the form of educating young
women. Ideas of craftwork and simplicity 
manifested themselves in decorative work,
including the metalwork and pottery of
the Arts and Crafts movement. Schools
and training programs taught quality 
design, a cornerstone of the Arts and 
Crafts movement. In Boston, the Saturday
Evening Girls Club, established in 1899
as a reading group for immigrant girls,
founded the Paul Revere Pottery, which
began producing pottery (2000.31) in 
1908 and offered the girls the ability
to earn good wages within the community.
Newcomb Pottery was formed in New Orleans
in the winter of 1894–95 under the 
auspices of the H. Sophie Newcomb
Memorial College, an educational 
institution for women. Using local
Southern flora and fauna as inspiration,
the female designers at Newcomb made 
pottery (1983.26) and later also produced
metalwork and textiles (2004.334).

In addition to pottery, women fashioned 
jewelry in the Arts and Crafts mode.
Stones were chosen for their inherent
artistic qualities, resulting in jewelry
that promoted truth to materials. 
Florence Koehler (1861–1944), a charter
member of the Chicago Arts and Crafts
Society, taught china painting, jewelry,
and metalsmithing. After studying
jewelry and enamelwork in London, she
referenced historic design, especially
Renaissance sources 
(52.43.1; 52.43.2; 52.43.3). Marie Zimmermann
(1879–1972) began her artistic career as
a jewelry designer and later expanded
her metalsmithing to include ornamental
garden and home objects. An 
idiosyncratic designer, Zimmermann studied
foreign cultures for inspiration, 
including Egypt (2005.464), Greece, and
China.

Without a singular philosophy, diversity
persevered within the Arts and Crafts
movement as a mixture of individuals
worked in diverse locations. There were 
regional differences due to the 
geographical distribution from the 
East Coast, to the Midwest, to California.
Craftsmen used a wide range of source
material to produce handwrought objects.
Arthur J. Stone (1847–1938), a dedicated
member of the Boston Society of Arts and
Crafts, produced silver objects that
were conservative in design. An 
Englishman who emigrated to the
United States, Stone opened his silver
shop in Gardner, Massachusetts, where
he initially executed all pieces himself.
When the business expanded, he hired 
additional craftsmen to make individual
works (1990.49). There were also 
creative designers with unique vision,
such as Charles Rohlfs (1853–1936),
who worked in Buffalo, New York. Rohlfs
eschewed industrial production methods,
preferring to craft individual pieces
of furniture (1985.261) utilizing a 
myriad of foreign sources, including
Moorish, Chinese, and Scandinavian design.
Gustav Stickley (1858–1942), founder of
The United Crafts (later known as the 
Craftsman Workshops), was a proselytizer
of the craftsman ideal. Emulating William
Morris’s production through guild
manufacture of his furniture, Stickley
believed that mass-produced furniture
was poorly constructed and overly 
complicated in design. Stickley set
out to improve American taste through
“craftsman” or “mission” furniture with
designs governed by honest construction,
simple lines, and quality material 
(1976.389.1). He also published the
highly influential The Craftsman (1901–16)
, a beacon for the American Arts and
Crafts movement.

Publications, including The Craftsman,
House Beautiful, and Ladies Home 
Journal, disseminated ideas about design
and interiors. The ideal home that
emerged had an open-planned interior 
shaped by a color palette that reflected
the natural environment. Articles and
illustrations presented decorating 
suggestions, including the use of colors,
type of furniture, and decorative 
accessories, such as rugs and pottery.
Period sources embraced Grueby Pottery
for its innovative interpretation of 
nature and craftsmanship. Founded by
William Grueby (1867–1925), the pottery
was known for naturally shaped vessels
with matte green glaze (69.91.2). In
addition to pottery, lighting was also
an important element that contributed
to the ideal Arts and Crafts interior.
The copper electric table lamp
(1989.129) was the archetypal object 
crafted by the Dirk Van Erp Studio.
Additionally, a Native American 
undercurrent developed during the Arts
and Crafts movement, as evidenced by
fashionable Indian-style baskets and 
textiles featured in Arts and Crafts 
exhibitions and publications. Many
collected baskets to display in their
Indian corners, which may have inspired
Louis Comfort Tiffany (1848–1933) to 
design a hanging shade in an Indian 
basket motif (69.150).

Frank Lloyd Wright (1867–1959) shaped 
a new way of living through his completely
designed environments, encompassing 
architecture and all elements of interiors.
He ushered in a style of architecture
that became known as the Prairie School,
characterized by low-pitched roofs, open
interiors, and horizontal lines that 
reflected the prairie landscape. This
architecture, which utilized natural
materials such as wood, clay, and stone,
sparked a revolutionary shift in the
American interior (1972.60.1). Wright’s
“organic” architecture was indebted to
nature. However, plain surfaces with 
minimal decorative embellishments were
suited to incorporating the machine,
resulting in furniture with intense
rectilinearity and natural surfaces. 
In addition to Wright, popular Prairie
School architects William Gray Purcell
(1880–1965) and George Grant Elmslie 
(1871–1952) directed offices in 
Minneapolis and Chicago. Purcell,
Feick and Elmslie (as the firm was
known between 1910 and 1913 with the
addition of George Feick Jr. [1881–1945])
remodeled the J. G. Cross House in 
Minneapolis in 1911 (1972.20.2). The
firm specialized in residences with 
artistic interiors (especially for a
middle-class clientele, although they
certainly worked for wealthy patrons 
as well) using organic decorative elements.
Like Wright and Purcell, Feick and 
Elmslie, Charles Sumner Greene (1869–1957)
and Henry Mather Greene (1870–1954), 
California architect-designers of the 
period, were interested in domestic 
architecture incorporating the interior
as a total work of art. The brothers
Greene initially worked in all the popular
revival styles, but after examining
English and American design periodicals
and Charles Greene’s formative trip 
abroad, their style shifted by the 
early 1900s. They fashioned a distinctive
style, heavily influenced by Asian design,
that reached its zenith with the bungalow,
the quintessential Arts and Crafts 
architectural form, characterized by
broad overhanging eaves, articulated 
woodwork, and an open plan. For the
Blacker House (1907) in Pasadena, Greene
and Greene used Japanese design to 
meticulously craft elements in their 
comprehensive schemes, inside and out
(1986.445; 1992.127).

The rise of urban centers and the
inevitability of technology presaged 
the end of the Arts and Crafts movement.
The search for nature and an idealist
medieval era was no longer a valid
approach to living. By the 1920s, 
machine-age modernity and the pursuit of
a national identity had captured the 
attention of designers and consumers, 
bringing an end to the handcrafted nature
of the Arts and Crafts movement in America.
https://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/acam/hd_acam.htm


ARTS AND CRAFTS
Arts and Crafts was a design movement 
initiated by William Morris in 1861 which
aimed to improve the quality of design
and make it available to the widest 
possible audience

TwitterFacebookEmailPinterest
William Morris, ‘Guinevere and Iseult:
Cartoon for Stained Glass’ 1862
William Morris
Guinevere and Iseult: Cartoon for Stained
Glass 1862
Tate
The Arts and Crafts Movement emerged from 
the Pre-Raphaelite circle with the
founding of the design firm Morris and
Co. in 1861 by William Morris. He 
recruited Dante Gabriel Rossetti, Ford
Madox Brown and Edward Burne-Jones as
artist-designers with the key principle
of raising design to the level of art. 
Morris emphasised simple functional 
design without the excess ornament and 
imitation of past typical of Victorian
styles. Wallpapers or fabrics were based
on natural motifs, particularly plant 
forms treated as flat pattern.


The Arts and Crafts movement is often 
seen as the starting point for modern 
design approaches, as noted in Nikolaus
Pevsner's book Pioneers of Modern Design:
William Morris to Walter Gropius first
published 1936.
https://www.tate.org.uk/art/art-terms/a/arts-and-crafts



